---
layout: post
title: DirectXMath 3.08
date: 2015-12-01 14:40
author: walbourn
comments: true
categories: [Uncategorized, xnamath]
---
DirectXMath version 3.08 is included in the <a href="http://blogs.msdn.com/b/chuckw/archive/2015/11/30/windows-10-sdk-november-2015.aspx">Windows 10 SDK November 2015 update (10586)</a> that ships with <a href="http://blogs.msdn.com/b/chuckw/archive/2015/11/30/visual-studio-2015-update-1.aspx">VS 2015 Update 1</a> with the Windows Tools 1.2 for Windows 10.

This new version includes the following:
<ul>
 	<li>Added use of <code>_mm_sfence</code> for Stream methods</li>
 	<li>Fixed bug with non-uniform scaling transforms for <code>BoundingOrientedBox</code></li>
 	<li>Added asserts for Near/FarZ in XMMatrix* methods</li>
 	<li>Added use of <code>=default</code> for PODs with VS 2013/2015</li>
 	<li>Additional SSE and ARM-NEON optimizations for PackedVector functions</li>
</ul>
It's a fairly minor update compared to <a href="http://blogs.msdn.com/b/chuckw/archive/2015/04/29/directxmath-3-07.aspx">DirectXMath 3.07</a>, but does have one interesting side-effect worth discussing further. Because of the use of the C++11 <code>=default</code> construct, existing DirectXMath code may generate new previously latent warnings when building with VS 2013 or VS 2015:
<pre class="scroll"><code class="cplusplus">warning C4101: 'X': unreferenced local variable

warning C4701: potentially uninitialized local variable 'X' used</code></pre>
The warnings are easy to address, but may surprise developers when they pop up in existing code. Note that the <code>=default</code> construct is not merely syntactic fluff: In some use cases, it can make the compiler generate much better code by understanding the constructor does nothing at all and the type in question is in fact 'trivial plain-old-data'. This mostly shows up in the cases of inheritance, so it may not be obviously different in simple codegen cases. It does, however, cause these compiler to notice when a variable is not actually used or initialized.
<h1>BoundingOrientedBox</h1>
The fix for non-uniform scaling transformations is trivial to apply to older versions of the library:
<pre class="scroll"><code class="cplusplus"> inline void XM_CALLCONV BoundingOrientedBox::Transform( BoundingOrientedBox&amp; Out, FXMMATRIX M ) const
 {
 // Load the box.
 XMVECTOR vCenter = XMLoadFloat3( &amp;Center );
 XMVECTOR vExtents = XMLoadFloat3( &amp;Extents );
 XMVECTOR vOrientation = XMLoadFloat4( &amp;Orientation );
 
 assert( DirectX::Internal::XMQuaternionIsUnit( vOrientation ) );
 
 // Composite the box rotation and the transform rotation.
 XMMATRIX nM;
 nM.r[0] = XMVector3Normalize( M.r[0] );
 nM.r[1] = XMVector3Normalize( M.r[1] );
 nM.r[2] = XMVector3Normalize( M.r[2] );
 nM.r[3] = g_XMIdentityR3;
 XMVECTOR Rotation = XMQuaternionRotationMatrix( nM );
 vOrientation = XMQuaternionMultiply( vOrientation, Rotation );
 
 // Transform the center.
 vCenter = XMVector3Transform( vCenter, M );
 
 // Scale the box extents.
 XMVECTOR dX = XMVector3Length( M.r[0] );
 XMVECTOR dY = XMVector3Length( M.r[1] );
 XMVECTOR dZ = XMVector3Length( M.r[2] );
 
 XMVECTOR VectorScale = XMVectorSelect( dY, dX, g_XMSelect1000 ); // !!swapped dX and dY
 VectorScale = XMVectorSelect( dZ, VectorScale, g_XMSelect1100 ); // !!swapped dZ and VectorScale
 vExtents = vExtents * VectorScale;
 
 // Store the box.
 XMStoreFloat3( &amp;Out.Center, vCenter );
 XMStoreFloat3( &amp;Out.Extents, vExtents );
 XMStoreFloat4( &amp;Out.Orientation, vOrientation );
 }
 </code></pre>
<strong>Xbox One:</strong> DirectXMath 3.08 shipped in the Xbox One XDK (July 2015 or later)

<strong>GitHub:</strong> Note that DirectXMath is now hosted on <a href="https://github.com/Microsoft/DirectXMath">GitHub</a>.

<strong>Related:</strong> <a href="http://blogs.msdn.com/b/chuckw/archive/2013/03/06/known-issues-directxmath-3-03.aspx">Known Issues: DirectXMath 3.03</a>, <a href="http://blogs.msdn.com/b/chuckw/archive/2013/10/24/directxmath-3-06.aspx">DirectXMath 3.06,</a> <a href="https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/chuckw/2016/08/02/directxmath-3-09/">DirectXMath 3.09</a>, <a href="https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/chuckw/2017/04/06/directxmath-3-10/">DirectXMath 3.10</a>, <a href="https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/chuckw/2017/06/28/directxmath-3-11/">DirectXMath 3.11</a>
